We're now going to
turn our attention
to one of the processing
phases and discuss
the order of processing.
And we'll see once again
it's important to know
what you can change and
what you can't change.
So let's talk about
stream processing order.
What the heck does that mean?
Well, keep in mind when we
talk about processing order,
we're in the apply phase.
And this is the phase
where the chunks that
were created by the
split phase are then
mapped to the underlying
common ForkJoinPool
to be run in parallel.
Now, it turns out that
the order in which
the chunks in a parallel
stream are processed
is intentionally
non-deterministic.
What that means is, is you
have no control over it.
And what'll happen
here is that the way
in which the ForkJoinPool takes
the tasks that it's been given
and runs them can be
different for different runs,
be different on
different hardware,
different in different
operating systems,
different on versions
of the Java execution
environment, Java virtual
machine, and so on,
even for the same input.
And programmers have little
or no control over that.
You just can't do
anything about it.
And that's actually by design.
The reason for doing this is
it enables the various layers
in the Java execution
environment,
say a JVM, Java virtual machine,
or something like the Android
Arch runtime environment, which
uses ahead of time compilation
as opposed to virtual
machine interpretation.
All of these kinds
of things can be
optimized in ways that are
transparent to your code.
So the way in which tasks
are scheduled and executed
in the ForkJoinPool, on the
execution environment, the JVM,
the hardware cores, the
operating system, the operating
system threads,
all of those things
can be optimized in a way that's
totally transparent to you.
And that's a good thing.
You don't really want to have
to know about those details.
A good example of where some
non-determinism might come from
is the fork-join framework
support for work stealing.
We're going to talk a lot about
work stealing when we talk
about the fork-join framework.
And we'll talk a
little bit about it
when we talk about how
the parallel streams
framework uses ForkJoinPool.
But basically what happens
is, if you've got the worker
threads in the
ForkJoinPool, each
have their own
internal queue, which
is called a deck or
a double-ended queue.
And whenever a worker thread
has no work on its deck,
it turns around and tries
to steal available work
from other worker
threads' decks in order
to be able to have
the performance
maximized of the CPU of
the multicore processors.
And the reason for doing this
is to improve overall throughput
in the system.
But it also leads to a
lot of non-determinism.
And that's perfectly OK.
That's what you want.